.TH SEXC 1 "2026-06-16" "sexc" "SexC Manual"
.SH NAME
sexc \- an S-expression to C transpiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sexc
.RI [ flags ]
.IR input.sexc
.br
.B sexc
.RI [ flags ]
.B \-
.br
.B sexc
.RI [ flags ]
.IR input.sexc
.B \-C
.IR cmd ...
.br
.B sexc
.RI [ flags ]
.IR command " [" args ...]
.br
.B sexc \-h " | " sexc \-\-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sexc
transpiles a Lisp-syntax (.sexc) program into C, written to standard output.
Beyond compilation it exposes tooling commands used by editor integrations:
on-the-fly checking, documentation lookup, completion, cross-reference, and
metadata dumps.
.PP
By default an implicit prelude (std/core.sexc and the stdlib macros) is loaded
from the resolved stdlib directory. Generated C carries
.B #line
directives so a C compiler's errors point back at the .sexc source.
.SH GLOBAL FLAGS
These are placed before the input file or command.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-prelude
Do not auto-load the implicit prelude (std/core.sexc and the stdlib macros).
Use for self-contained low-level files or tests.
.TP
.BR \-\-quiet ", " \-q
Suppress the per-stage progress logs printed to stderr (parsing, macro
expansion, codegen timings). Same as setting
.BR SEXC_QUIET=1 .
Editor integrations should pass this so only diagnostics reach stderr.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-line
Omit
.RB ` "#line N \(dqfile\(dq" '
directives from the generated C. They are emitted by default so a C compiler's
errors map back to the .sexc source; snapshot tests disable them for stable
output.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show the brief built-in help and exit 0.
.SH COMPILATION
With no subcommand,
.B sexc
transpiles its input to C on stdout.
.TP
.I input.sexc
Transpile the named file.
.TP
.B \-
Read source from standard input. Relative
.B %import
targets resolve against the current working directory, so an editor can pipe an
unsaved buffer and still find its imports.
.TP
.IB input.sexc " \-C " cmd ...
Transpile to a temporary .c file, then run
.I cmd
with the token
.RB ` % '
replaced by that file's path \(em a one-step "compile and build". The command
must contain a
.RB ` % '.
.PP
Examples:
.PP
.RS
.EX
sexc prog.sexc > prog.c
sexc prog.sexc \-C gcc % \-o prog
sexc examples/raylib_std.sexc \-C gcc % \-lraylib \-lm \-o demo
printf '(defn int main () (return 0))' | sexc \-
.EE
.RE
.SH COMMANDS
.SS check
.B sexc
.RB [ \-\-no\-prelude ]
.B check
.IR input.sexc | \-
.PP
Expand and type the program, report diagnostics, and emit no C. Exit 0 and
silent on success; exit 1 with diagnostics on failure. Editors run this for
on-the-fly checking, piping the buffer via
.BR \- .
.PP
.RS
.EX
sexc check prog.sexc
sexc \-\-quiet check \-
.EE
.RE
.SS show-doc
.B sexc
.RB [ \-\-no\-prelude ]
.B show-doc
.RB [ \-\-at
.IR L:C ]
.I name
.RI [ input.sexc ]
.PP
Print a symbol's documentation: name, kind, signature, doc, example, and source
location. Without a file the symbol is looked up in the stdlib; with a file the
file's own symbols are included too. The
.B \-\-at
.I L:C
flag passes the cursor position so an
.I obj::method
name resolves through the object's type at that point.
.PP
.RS
.EX
sexc show-doc defn
sexc show-doc Stack/push prog.sexc
sexc show-doc \-\-at 61:5 s::push prog.sexc
.EE
.RE
.SS complete
.B sexc
.RB [ \-\-no\-prelude ]
.B complete
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.I prefix
.RI [ input.sexc | \- ]
.PP
List completion candidates whose name starts with
.IR prefix .
Prints one name per line, or full symbol records with
.BR \-\-json .
Function-local variables are intentionally excluded (they are scope-specific
noise).
.PP
.RS
.EX
sexc complete with
sexc complete \-\-json Stack prog.sexc
.EE
.RE
.SS xref
.B sexc
.RB [ \-\-no\-prelude ]
.B xref
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.RB [ \-\-at
.IR L:C ]
.I symbol
.I input.sexc
.PP
Print a symbol's definition site(s) as
.IR file:line:col " " name .
The
.B \-\-at
.I L:C
flag resolves an
.I obj::method
symbol to
.I Type/method
via the type of the variable named
.I obj
declared nearest above that line, so goto-definition works on method calls.
.B \-\-json
prints full records.
.PP
.RS
.EX
sexc xref WindowShouldClose prog.sexc
sexc xref \-\-at 59:30 s::pop prog.sexc
.EE
.RE
.SS m-dump
.B sexc
.RB [ \-\-no\-prelude ]
.B m-dump
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.I input.sexc
.PP
Dump the compile-time symbol metadata collected during macro expansion (each
symbol's
.BR :kind ", " :flags ", " :return-type ,
and so on). Does not accept stdin.
.PP
.RS
.EX
sexc m-dump prog.sexc
sexc m-dump \-\-json prog.sexc
.EE
.RE
.SS dump-docs, dump-stdlib-docs
.B sexc
.RB [ \-\-no\-prelude ]
.B dump-docs
.I input.sexc out-dir
.br
.B sexc
.B dump-stdlib-docs
.I out-dir
.PP
Write per-symbol Markdown documentation to a directory.
.PP
.RS
.EX
sexc dump-stdlib-docs ./docs
.EE
.RE
.SS print-cache-dump
.B sexc
.B print-cache-dump
.PP
Print the on-disk index cache (for debugging).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SEXC_STDLIB_DIR
Override the stdlib lookup directory (the one holding core.sexc). The default
search order is: next to the binary, PREFIX/include/sexc/std, ./std.
.TP
.B SEXC_QUIET
When set to a non-empty, non-zero value, suppress stage logs (same as
.BR \-\-quiet ).
.SH NOTES
The implicit prelude auto-loads core.sexc and the stdlib macros from the
resolved stdlib directory. Use
.B \-\-no\-prelude
to disable it.
.PP
Relative
.B %import
resolves against the importing file's directory, or, for stdin, the current
working directory.
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX
# Transpile and run via gcc in one step
sexc prog.sexc \-C gcc % \-o prog && ./prog

# Check a buffer piped from an editor
sexc \-\-quiet check \-

# Jump to the definition of a method call
sexc xref \-\-at 59:30 s::pop prog.sexc
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
The project README and AGENTS.md for language reference and stdlib conventions.
